An x86-64 central processing unit (CPU) contains a set of 16 `general-purpose registers` storing 64-bit values. These registers are used to store integer data as well as pointers.


|        | 64-bit | 32-bit  | 16-bit  | 8-bit   |               |
| ------ | ------ | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------------- |
| `%rax` | `%rax` | `%eax`  | `%ax`   | `%al`   | Return value  |
| `%rbx` | `%rbx` | `%ebx`  | `%bx`   | `%bl`   | Callee saved  |
| `%rcx` | `%rcx` | `%ecx`  | `%cx`   | `%cl`   | 4th argument  |
| `%rdx` | `%rdx` | `%edx`  | `%dx`   | `%dl`   | 3rd argument  |
| `%rsi` | `%rsi` | `%esi`  | `%si`   | `%sil`  | 2nd argument  |
| `%rdi` | `%rdi` | `%edi`  | `%di`   | `%dil`  | 1st argument  |
| `%rbp` | `%rbp` | `%ebp`  | `%bp`   | `%bpl`  | Callee saved  |
| `%rsp` | `%rsp` | `%esp`  | `%sp`   | `%spl`  | Stack pointer |
| `%r8`  | `%r8`  | `%r8d`  | `%r8w`  | `%r8b`  | 5th argument  |
| `%r9`  | `%r9`  | `%r9d`  | `%r9w`  | `%r9b`  | 6th argument  |
| `%r10` | `%r10` | `%r10d` | `%r10w` | `%r10b` | Caller saved  |
| `%r11` | `%r11` | `%r11d` | `%r11w` | `%r11b` | Caller saved  |
| `%r12` | `%r12` | `%r12d` | `%r12w` | `%r12b` | Callee saved  |
| `%r13` | `%r13` | `%r13d` | `%r13w` | `%r13b` | Callee saved  |
| `%r14` | `%r14` | `%r14d` | `%r14w` | `%r14b` | Callee saved  |
| `%r15` | `%r15` | `%r15d` | `%r15w` | `%r15b` | Callee saved  |

An x86-64 central processing unit (CPU) contains a set of 16 **general-purpose registers** storing 64-bit values. These registers are used to store integer data as well as pointers. Figure 3.2 diagrams the 16 registers. Their names all begin with `%r`, but otherwise follow multiple different naming conventions, owing to the historical evolution of the instruction set.

The original 8086 had eight 16-bit registers, shown in Figure 3.2 as registers `%ax` through `%bp`. Each had a specific purpose, and hence they were given names that reflected how they were to be used. With the extension to IA32, these registers were expanded to 32-bit registers, labeled `%eax` through `%ebp`. In the extension to x86-64, the original eight registers were expanded to 64 bits, labeled `%rax` through `%rbp`. In addition, eight new registers were added, and these were given labels according to a new naming convention: `%r8` through `%r15`.

As the nested boxes in Figure 3.2 indicate, instructions can operate on data of different sizes stored in the low-order bytes of the 16 registers. Byte-level operations can access the least significant byte, 16-bit operations can access the least significant 2 bytes, 32-bit operations can access the least significant 4 bytes, and 64-bit operations can access entire registers.

In later sections, we will present a number of instructions for copying and generating 1-, 2-, 4-, and 8-byte values. When these instructions have registers as destinations, two conventions arise for what happens to the remaining bytes in the register for instructions that generate less than 8 bytes:
- Those that generate **1- or 2-byte quantities** leave the remaining bytes unchanged.
- Those that generate **4-byte quantities** set the upper 4 bytes of the register to zero.
The latter convention was adopted as part of the expansion from IA32 to x86-64.

As the annotations along the right-hand side of Figure 3.2 indicate, different registers serve different roles in typical programs. Most unique among them is the stack pointer, `%rsp`, used to indicate the end position in the run-time stack. Some instructions specifically read and write this register. The other 15 registers have more flexibility in their uses. A small number of instructions make specific use of certain registers. More importantly, a set of standard programming conventions governs how the registers are to be used for managing the stack, passing function arguments, returning values from functions, and storing local and temporary data.