The machine code for x86-64 differs greatly from the original C code. Parts of the processor state are visible that normally are hidden from the C programmer:

-  The `program counter` (commonly referred to as the PC, and called %rip in x86- 64) indicates the address in memory of the next instruction to be executed.

-  The integer `register file` contains 16 named locations storing 64-bit values. These registers can hold addresses (corresponding to C pointers) or integer data. Some registers are used to keep track of critical parts of the program state, while others are used to hold temporary data, such as the arguments and local variables of a procedure, as well as the value to be returned by a function.

-  The condition code registers hold status information about the most recently executed arithmetic or logical instruction. These are used to implement conditional changes in the control or data flow, such as is required to implement `if` and `while` statements.

-  A set of vector registers can each hold one or more integer or floating-point values.


Whereas C provides a model in which objects of different data types can be declared and allocated in memory, machine code views the memory as simply a large byte-addressable array. Aggregate data types in C such as arrays and structures are represented in machine code as contiguous collections of bytes. Even for scalar data types, assembly code makes no distinctions between signed or unsigned integers, between different types of pointers, or even between pointers and integers.

The program memory contains the executable machine code for the program, some information required by the operating system, a run-time stack for managing procedure calls and returns, and blocks of memory allocated by the user (e.g., by using the `malloc` library function). As mentioned earlier, the program memory is addressed using virtual addresses. At any given time, only limited subranges of virtual addresses are considered valid. For example, x86-64 virtual addresses are represented by 64-bit words. In current implementations of these machines, the upper 16 bits must be set to zero, and so an address can potentially specify a byte over a range of $2^{48}$, or 64 terabytes.


To inspect the contents of machine-code files, a class of programs known as disassemblers can be invaluable. These programs generate a format similar to assembly code from the machine code. With Linux systems, the program objdump (for “object dump”) can serve this role given the -d command-line flag:

```
linux> objdump -d mstore.o
```

The result (where we have added line numbers on the left and annotations in italicized text) is as follows:

**Disassembly of function `sum` in binary file `mstore.o`**

| Line | Offset | Bytes          | Equivalent assembly language |
|------|--------|----------------|------------------------------|
| 1    | 0      | 53             | `push %rbx`                  |
| 2    | 1      | 48 89 d3       | `mov %rdx, %rbx`             |
| 3    | 4      | e8 00 00 00 00 | `callq 9 <multstore+0x9>`    |
| 4    | 9      | 48 89 03       | `mov %rax, (%rbx)`           |
| 5    | c      | 5b             | `pop %rbx`                   |
| 6    | d      | c3             | `retq`                       |

On the left we see the 14 hexadecimal byte values, listed in the byte sequence shown earlier, partitioned into groups of 1 to 5 bytes each. Each of these groups is a single instruction, with the assembly-language equivalent shown on the right.

Several features about machine code and its disassembled representation are worth noting:

-  x86-64 instructions can range in length from 1 to 15 bytes. The instruction encoding is designed so that commonly used instructions and those with fewer operands require a smaller number of bytes than do less common ones or ones with more operands.

-  The instruction format is designed in such a way that from a given starting position, there is a unique decoding of the bytes into machine instructions. For example, only the instruction `pushq %rbx` can start with byte value 53.

-  The disassembler determines the assembly code based purely on the byte sequences in the machine-code file. It does not require access to the source or assembly-code versions of the program.

-  The disassembler uses a slightly different naming convention for the instructions than does the assembly code generated by `GCC`. In our example, it has omitted the suffix ‘q’ from many of the instructions. These suffixes are size designators and can be omitted in most cases. Conversely, the disassembler adds the suffix ‘q’ to the `call` and `ret` instructions. Again, these suffixes can safely be omitted.